---
categories: Programming
date: 2010/11/12 19:56:45
guid: http://rafekettler.com/?p=56
tags: programming, tools
title: Why I switched to NetBeans
---
The choice of an IDE is a deeply personal decision and, just like coders debate about which languages are better than others, coders debate over which IDE is best.

For a while, I had been developing in Eclipse. I was attracted by the extensibility and the availability of a strong Python add-on (PyDev). However, since I upgraded from Eclipse and started having problems, I've decided to switch to NetBeans. Here's why.

**Installation, extension, and upgrades**

Sadly, I do most of my development (from an IDE, at least) in Windows. And in Windows, programs have installers and get put in the "Program Files" directory.

Eclipse, along with Python and a few others, eschew this and decide to install themselves in strange ways. Python actually has an installer and will make shortcuts for you. Eclipse, on the other hand, is just an archive and expects you to just drop it in C:\. That's all well and good, but it makes it a pain to find it, and then create shortcuts. This is a minor papercut, but it hurts.

NetBeans, on the other hand, has \*gasp\* _an installer_. It puts its files in the right places. It makes shortcuts. It works like it should on Windows.

I feel the same way about the plugin architecture for Eclipse. In most extensible programs (e.g. Firefox), you can go to a wizard of some sort to install plugins. For Eclipse, you have to go to the "Help" menu, of all places, and tell Eclipse a software site (which is usually not easy to find). In NetBeans, on the other hand, you just go through a wizard that is easy to find, plug, and play.

**Python editing**

PyDev is a pretty good Python IDE, but it doesn't have the same editing capabilities as Java in Eclipse. There's no way, as far as I know, to have custom templates for Python, the syntax highlighting scheme is asinine, and the spell checking feature? Don't get me started (I know all of this can be changed, but why would  such a stupid feature be enabled by default?). NetBeans with Python, on the other hand, is just as full-featured an editor as Netbeans with Java. I also prefer the keyboard shortcut scheme in NetBeans to the one in Eclipse.

**CDT sucks**

The C/C++ Development Tools for Eclipse suck. They're impossible to figure out, and to this day I've never figured out how to compile a Hello World program (I shouldn't have to use CMake to do that). With NetBeans C/C++, I can compile a Hello World program. Therefore, NetBeans is a better IDE for C/C++.

**Version control**

It makes no sense that svn, the most popular version control system, isn't integrated with Eclipse off the shelf. Not only does NetBeans immediately come with svn, it also works with Mercurial. That's a win in my eyes. Subclipse, the best svn plugin for Eclipse, is functional, but a bit clunky.

**Perspectives on perspectives**

I don't want to have to tell Eclipse whether to give me a Python or a Java perspective. It should be able to know what kind of project I'm working on and just tell. However, this logic is beyond Eclipse. NetBeans has no idiotic perspectives; rather, it just changes when I change languages. How's that for intuitive?

**GUI builder**

I don't use Swing, but this is cool. I like being able to easily build a GUI, and I might just start using Swing because of NetBeans.

I know I ask a lot of Eclipse, but with my IDEs I'm looking for a one-stop shop. Eclipse does Java pretty well, but out of the four languages I develop in, I use Java the least. So I need an IDE that treats all languages equally, and NetBeans is it. I also need an IDE that thinks rationally, and clearly Eclipse doesn't do that.

I don't mean to evangelize Oracle's technology over a more open project, but NetBeans works better, and I like to use the best tools available. So, if you have the chance and you're like me, switch (or at least try NetBeans).
